.. jVMC documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Sun Sep 27 09:17:47 2020.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   
   self

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 2
   :caption: API documentation:

   operator
   vqs
   nets
   sampler

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :maxdepth: 1
    :caption: Examples:

    examples

`jVMC`: Versatile and performant variational Monte Carlo
========================================================

This package, `available on GitHub <https://github.com/markusschmitt/vmc_jax>`_, 
provides a versatile and efficient implementation of variational
quantum Monte Carlo in Python. It utilizes Google's 
`JAX <https://github.com/google/jax>`_ library to exploit the
blessings of automatic differentiation and just-in-time compilation for
available computing resources. The package is devised to serve as white box
implementation of the core computational tasks that guarantees efficiency, 
while at the same time providing large flexibility.

In particular, `jVMC` provides a framework that allows to work with arbitrary
variational wave functions and bosonic quantum operators. The code was
written mainly with neural quantum states (NQS) as variational wave functions
in mind, but it is not restricted to that; the ansatz wave functions can be
arbitrary parametrized programs. Nonetheless, throughout the documentation
we will refer to the variational ansätze as "networks".

Design choices
##############

Variational wave functions
--------------------------
A core part of this codebase is the ``NQS`` class, an abstract wrapper class 
for variational wave functions, which proves an interface that other parts 
of the code rely on. At initialization the specific variational wave function 
is passed to ``NQS``. The implementation of the variational function has to 
be `registered as a pytree <https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/pytrees.html>`_ 
and it has to be callable.

A simple way to meet these requirements is to implement variational wave
functions as modules in the `Flax <https://github.com/google/flax>`_ framework.
`Flax <https://github.com/google/flax>`_ is a
library that supplements `JAX` with a class structure to enable simple
implementation of neural networks (and more) based on modules as it is
known also from `Pytorch`.

Parallelism
-----------
The performance of the code relies on a few design choices, which enable
efficient computation for typical use cases on a desktop device as well as
on distributed multi GPU clusters. An important manifestation of these
choices are required array dimensions when interfacing `jVMC`: All data
that is related to network evaluations will have two leading dimensions, 
namely the `device dimension` and the `batch dimension`.

**Example:**

    Assume we are using a computer that has a single GPU accelerator.
    Moreover, we are working on a one-dimensional system of size :math:`L=7`.
    We have defined a suited ``MCMCSampler`` object called ``sampler`` and
    also a ``NQS`` object called ``psi``. Then we can inspect the shape of the
    configuration array generated by the sampler, when asking for ``10`` 
    configurations, as follows:
    
    >>> configs, _, _ = sampler.sample(psi, 10)
    >>> configs.shape
    (1,10,7)
    
    The first dimension is the `device dimension`, which takes the value ``1``,
    because we have a single GPU. The second dimension is the `batch dimension`,
    which equals the number of samples we asked for. The following dimensions
    correspond to the physical system, in this case, :math:`L=7`.
    
    Now, let's evaluate the wave function on this batch of configurations:
    
    >>> logPsi = psi(configs)
    >>> logPsi.shape
    (1,10)
    
    We obtain one wave function coefficient per configuration (size of the 
    `batch dimension`) and keep the leading `device dimension`.
    
    Finally, we might need gradients:
    
    >>> g = psi.gradients(configs)
    >>> g.shape
    (1,10,123)
    
    Again, we see the known leading dimensions. Moreover, our variational
    wave function ``psi`` seems to have 123 parameters, which explains the
    size of the last dimension.

The following provides a more detailed explanation of this choice.

Intrinsic parallelism
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In variational Monte Carlo multiple levels of parallelism can be exploited.

First, Monte Carlo sampling is an "embarrassingly parallel" task that is
straightforward to distribute among multiple processes. `jVMC` employs MPI
to parallelize Monte Carlo sampling, allowing to utilize multiple cores
locally or many nodes of a cluster.

At the lower level, the algorithm requires independent wave function 
evaluations on large numbers of computational basis states. This task is well 
suited for SIMD parallelization schemes; even more so, when the evaluation
involves suited operations like matrix-vector products in the case of NQS.
Therefore, `jVMC` batches operations wherever possible, relying on JAX
just-in-time-compilation to generate efficient code that exploits the local
computing resources.

Multiple accelerators per node
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
There are different ways to deal with computers that proved multiple
accelerators per compute node, namely: 

    (i) Launch one MPI process per accelerator.
    (ii) Distribute computation across the available devices,
         while working with a single process.

`jVMC` supports both options. The ``jVMC.global_defs.set_pmap_devices()`` function
enables the user at the beginning of a program to choose for each MPI process
which subset of the available devices to work with. For a homogeneous treatment
of both choices, any data arrays passed to or obtained from the `jVMC` API have
an additional leading `device dimension` to account for potential parallelization 
across devices. The size of this dimension corresponds to the number of devices 
used by the process and any computation will be distributed among the devices.

It is important to realize and keep in mind that when working with multiple
devices the `device dimension` is also `physically` distributed across the different
devices. Hence, any computation on data with `device dimension` larger than one
should be performed on the respective devices to avoid memory transfer overheads.

Batching
^^^^^^^^
To guarantee high arithmetic intensity suited batching of computational tasks
is crucial. This applies in particular to wave function evaluations. Therefore,
any operation implemented in `jVMC` is performed on a batch of input data. This
means that following the leading `device dimension`, any data arrays passed to or 
obtained from the `jVMC` API have an additional `batch dimension`.

Indices and tables
==================

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
