README.md, before:

[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/jvmc/badge/?version=latest)](https://jvmc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)

# jVMC
This is an impementation of Variational Monte Carlo (VMC) for quantum many-body dynamics using the [JAX library](https://jax.readthedocs.io "JAX library") (and [Flax](https://flax.readthedocs.io "FLAX library") on top) to exploit the blessings of automatic differentiation for easy model composition and just-in-time compilation for execution on accelerators.

## Documentation

Documentation is available [here](https://jvmc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ "Documentation").

## Installation

### Option 1: ``pip``-install

1. We recommend you create a new conda environment to work with jVMC:

        conda create -n jvmc python=3.8
        conda activate jvmc

2. ``pip``-install the package

        pip install jVMC


### Option 2: Clone and ``pip``-install

1. Clone the jVMC repository and check out the development branch:

        git clone https://github.com/markusschmitt/vmc_jax.git
        cd vmc_jax

2. We recommend you create a new conda environment to work with jVMC:

        conda create -n jvmc python=3.8
        conda activate jvmc


3. ``pip``-install the package  

        pip install .  

    Alternatively, for development:

        pip install -e .[dev]

Test that everything worked, e.g. run 'python -c "import jVMC"' from a place different than ``vmc_jax``.

### Compiling JAX

[How to compile JAX on a supercomputing cluster](documentation/readme/compile_jax_on_cluster.md)


## Online example

[![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/markusschmitt/vmc_jax/blob/master/examples/ex0_ground_state_search.ipynb)

Click on the badge above to open a notebook that implements an exemplary ground state search in Google Colab.

## Citing jVMC

If you use the jVMC package for your research, please cite our reference paper [arXiv:2108.03409](https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.03409).

Commit message:

Updated net documentation and README.

README.md, after:

[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/jvmc/badge/?version=latest)](https://jvmc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)

# jVMC
This is an impementation of Variational Monte Carlo (VMC) for quantum many-body dynamics using the [JAX library](https://jax.readthedocs.io "JAX library") (and [Flax](https://flax.readthedocs.io "FLAX library") on top) to exploit the blessings of automatic differentiation for easy model composition and just-in-time compilation for execution on accelerators.

1. [Documentation](#documentation)
2. [Installation](#installation)
3. [Online example](#online-example)
4. [Important gotchas](#important-gotchas)
5. [Citing jVMC](#citing-jvmc)

## Documentation

Documentation is available [here](https://jvmc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ "Documentation").

## Installation

### Option 1: ``pip``-install

1. We recommend you create a new conda environment to work with jVMC:

        conda create -n jvmc python=3.8
        conda activate jvmc

2. ``pip``-install the package

        pip install jVMC


### Option 2: Clone and ``pip``-install

1. Clone the jVMC repository and check out the development branch:

        git clone https://github.com/markusschmitt/vmc_jax.git
        cd vmc_jax

2. We recommend you create a new conda environment to work with jVMC:

        conda create -n jvmc python=3.8
        conda activate jvmc


3. ``pip``-install the package  

        pip install .  

    Alternatively, for development:

        pip install -e .[dev]

Test that everything worked, e.g. run 'python -c "import jVMC"' from a place different than ``vmc_jax``.

### Compiling JAX

[How to compile JAX on a supercomputing cluster](documentation/readme/compile_jax_on_cluster.md)


## Online example

[![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/markusschmitt/vmc_jax/blob/master/examples/ex0_ground_state_search.ipynb)

Click on the badge above to open a notebook that implements an exemplary ground state search in Google Colab.

## Important gotchas
### Out-of-memory issues and batching
Memory requirements grow with increasing network sizes. To avoid out-of-memory issues, the ``batchSize`` parameter of the ``NQS`` class has to be adjusted. The ``batchSize`` indicates on how many input configurations the network is evaluated concurrently. Out-of-memory issues are usually resolved by reducing this number. The ``numChains`` parameter of the ``Sampler`` class for Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling plays a similar role, but its optimal values in terms of computational speed are typically not memory critical.

## Citing jVMC

If you use the jVMC package for your research, please cite our reference paper [arXiv:2108.03409](https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.03409).
